Hey,
guys,
welcome back.
So this video is the first of two parts for dynamic date filters.
So in this video,
we're going to see a technique for filtering data tables using slicers.
So,
as you can see here,
I'm using a slicer and selecting a certain month.
And then my data,
as you can see here,
is reacting to my selection.
This data table here is reacting to my selection,
and also we could use our timeline.
So actually,
as you can see here,
I'm selecting between different quarters.
And also the data table is reacting and can also select from different years.
But actually this status,
it contains only one year.
That is 2014.
But if it had been the case that my data set contained several years,
then I would have been able to select from different years.
But you can see as well I can select from different month,
and I can actually select a period of time spanning between any two months as well using
the timeline.
So this is actually our final product,
and we're gonna look at what is behind all that.
What's in the back stage that's going to enable us to do this dynamic selection.
Okay,
so I've gone here to my row data worksheet,
which contains actually the road data behind this data table.
So I got here some Road eight is so Espersen the country order 80 order,
date order,
amount,
units sold.
And the month The month is actually a column that I have created,
which basically tags each state with the first day of the month so that I'll be able to
filter between different months.
And I'm using actually the date function to do that.
So the date function is a function in excel that can generate a date when you give it the
year and the month and a day.
And I'm actually excusing the year function to extract the year from the date.
Okay,
So in this case,
in case of this state,
which is the 18th of April,
2014 is gonna extract 2014 and for the month,
it's gonna extract four.
And actually,
I'm putting the day to be a one for all the cells because I'm just trying to tag the month
with the first day of the month,
and I'm actually making it.
Look,
this way how making it look like April 14 this way doesn't look like the first of April 14
.
How I made it look like April 14 is by using custom number formatting.
So if you right click on your cell,
click on form,
it sells here and then go to custom.
You'll see have a custom number for murder,
is applied and discussed.
A number format is Mm mm.
Dash Y y.
And this will give you this.
Look for the date.
There are other for,
missus.
Well,
so dee dee Dash Mm mm will actually give you the day and the month,
which is not actually what we're requiring.
So these air different number formance that you can apply for dates,
But I'm using this one so that I would have the month having this format and remember,
guys is just a form it it does not change the value in the cell.
It just changes how the cell looks.
And I'm doing this because this format will actually be reflected on my slicers.
Okay,
so my slicers are gonna be connected to this format,
so the slicers actually are gonna look the way these cells look.
So I've actually opted for that format so that the slicers would have January 14 February
14 March 14 written on them instead of the first of January 2014.
That's not very representative,
right?
Because we're trying to filter for the month,
not for a certain day.
Okay,
so after creating this data table and creating this Month column,
what I did is that I created a pivot table by going to the insert tab on the ribbon.
After having any cell in the table highlighted,
you go to the insert tab on the ribbon and then click on pivot table here,
and then you insert a new pivot table I have inserted the PIB table,
shows its location on the pivot sheet here,
so you can choose any location and then click OK,
and you pivot table is going to be inserted.
And here is my pivot table here.
Okay,
so this is the pivot table that I inserted on this sheet.
So after doing that,
I actually put the month in the filter here,
and I put the country on the rose and the total sales on the summation of values to create
this Look for the pivot table and then to insert a slicer,
you can highlight any cell in your pivot table and go to the insert tab on the ribbon here
and then click on slicer.
And then are you need to insert a slicer for the month.
I need to make the month the filter for my pivot table.
So I selected here month and then click.
OK,
As you can see here,
here is the slicer for the months,
and you can actually use this slicer to filter your pivot table,
as you can see here.
So I'm just gonna delete this slicer cause I've got one already here on this worksheet and
to create a timeline,
you can just tie light any cell in your table and then go to the insert tab on the ribbon
click on timeline.
And here I'm going to choose the month column because the Month column is the one that I
have selected here in the filter.
If you want to choose the order date,
you will need to create another pivot table and actually make the order date the filter
column here.
So I'm gonna click OK here.
After selecting the month and Aziz,
you can see here.
We can actually select between different months,
and this will be reflected on our pivot table.
And also we can select between different quarters in 2014.
But in case of the days as well,
the days are actually limited to just the first day of the month because the month column
actually contains the value of the first day of the month on Lee.
OK,
but if you select the order day to be the column for your timeline than in this case,
you'll be able to select any day of the month depending,
of course,
on the availability of the data.
So if there are no data in a certain day than your pivot table will just displaying no
results.
So actually,
if you want to use the order date,
you will just need to create another pivot table.
So if you go back to the road data worksheet here,
go to the insert Tom here,
click on pivot table,
and then I'm just gonna put it in the pivot worksheet as well.
Here click OK,
and you just need to put the order dates to be the column here in the filter and then
country and order amount as well the submission of the order amount.
And then you can go to the insert tab.
Click on Timeline.
By the way,
also,
in other versions of Excel,
it could be the anal.
I stopped to create a slicer or timelines or year analyzed Insert slicer.
Insert timeline.
So you're gonna actually select order date from here?
Click OK,
and as you can see here now,
if used the order date,
then you're gonna have all the options available,
like quarters and days.
A month here is actually going for 2000 and 15 but 2015 does not have any data on then.
If we select 2014 then we have our data being reflected here for the month SA's Well,
you can select one month.
You can select a period of time spanning between different months.
You can select a period of time spent spending between different days as well on a certain
month if you want to using the timeline.
So I'm just gonna delete that.
And by the way,
what I did to move the timeline or the slicer is very simple.
Selected press control on X on your keyboard and move it here.
Press control and V to paste it.
Okay,
so cut and paste.
Very simple.
So I'm just going to lead that one here.
And I'm gonna delete this pivot table as well because I'm basing the filtration on the
month columnist on the order date column.
Okay,
So selected.
I like to clear all to remove it.
No,
I'm going to go back to Slicer on timeline here,
and I want to show you something else as well as you can see here.
When I'm filtering the data using my slicers in a select a certain month,
you can see her that this table is shrinking and expanding.
Based on the data that I've got so you can see her The size of the table could change,
but actually,
the formatting of the table does not change.
And he always has the grand total column at the bottom with a certain format and the
countries in the middle with a different format and the titles for the table are with a
different format as well.
So how did we achieve that?
We achieve that actually,
through conditional formatting and also through formulas in this stable.
So this table is reading,
actually directly from the pivot table.
So the four minute here is actually very simple,
he says.
If the cell in the pivot worksheet is equal to Blank,
then give me a blank else.
Give me the value off the cell.
So it's basically an equal formula with an if statement,
so that if the cell is blanket will just display a blank value.
And after doing that,
there is actually conditional formatting that gives a formatting for the cell based on its
value.
So if the cell is one of the country's,
it gives it this gray color.
If it's the grand Total Cell gives it this blue filling with a white bolted fund.
And actually the title cell is is fixed in its place.
Okay,
so the title so does not have any formula.
And it just has this color here.
So the title cell does not have any conditional formatting.
Okay,
so let's check the conditional formatting applied so I can go to the conditional formatting
option here on my home tab on the ribbon click on manage rules.
And as you can see here in the current selection or you can also choose this worksheet to
Ciel,
the conditional formatting in the worksheet and let's start first by the conditional
formatting of the country's If I Just Highlighted here this conditional formatting that is
gray click on it a Truell.
You can see here that the formula that the conditional formatting is based on is that the
value in the cell does not equal two grand total okay,
and also the value in the cell In column C does not equal to blank and notice here as well
that I have fixed the column reference for column seen on the conditional formatting.
So this is the conditional formatting that is applied for the cells having the countries
and for the cells having the grand total or it's actually one sell it actually just tests.
If the cell in column C has a grand total,
then give me a black color and both conditional formatting Z are applied to the cells in
column C and column D,
and you can see here that I've applied it till row 23 on each column so that I would allow
for expansion and contraction off the table and also the form it is year actually extended
even beyond the table range to allow for expansion and contraction off the table.
I would recommend that you open this sample file and check it thoroughly.
Check the formulas and everything.
Okay,
so this concludes part one on how to create a dynamic date filter.
Thank you very much,
guys.
Watching this video,
and I'll see you on the next one.